# Green Energy Markowitz Portfolios
As part of my research into financing the energy transition, I constructed Markowitz efficient frontiers of the S&P Clean Energy Select Index alongside the NYSE ARCA Oil and Gas Index based on returns from 2019-2024. Markowitz efficient frontiers, otherwise known as ‘envelopes’ (such as in Benninga and Mofkadi, 2022), are a way of illustrating the different possible returns of various portfolios with different asset allocations (Semmler, 2011). A portfolio is “on the envelope of the feasible set if, for a given mean return, it has minimum variance” (Benninga and Mofkadi, 2022). 

The S&P Clean Energy Select Index was launched in 2021 and contains thirty of the largest companies with businesses related to clean energy. 48% of the indexed companies are in utilities; only 1.9% are pure-play energy producers (S&P Global Clean Energy Select Index Factsheet, 2023). The components of the index are listed in appendix 1, along with their expected return and volatility based on data from January 1, 2019 to January 1, 2024. S&P reports the median total market cap of these 30 firms to be $3.8 billion (S&P Global Clean Energy Select Index Factsheet, 2023). Over this time frame, using backfilled data, I calculated the expected daily return of this index to be 0.07%, with a standard deviation of 1.95%.

The closest analogue to the Clean Energy Select Index for brown assets is the NYSE ARCA Oil and Gas Index. The index was developed in the late 1980s (under its previous name, AMEX Oil Index) and includes twenty of the world’s largest oil and gas producers. These companies are listed in the appendix along with their expected return and volatility based off five years of daily price data from Yahoo Finance. Using Python and the ‘yfinance’ library, I calculated the median total market cap of these 18 firms to be $75 billion as of January 2024. The expected daily return of the ARCA index from January 1, 2019-January 1, 2024 was 0.06%, with a standard deviation of 2.4%.

These two baskets of equities are very different. The green basket is diversified across the range of industries which stand to profit from a climate transition. Tellingly, a plurality of its components are not invested in the production of energy, but rather in its distribution. This matches with Christophers’ observation about existing energy networks being more investible assets than greenfield renewable energy production. The brown basket is generally composed of larger, more mature companies; the smallest ARCA member, Marathon Oil Corporation, would be the eighth-largest company in the Clean Energy Select Index. 

One way to compare the performance of these two disparate indices is by examining their efficiency using static portfolio theory. How do the Sharpe ratios of the green assets compare with those of brown assets? Is it possible for green assets to deliver the same returns as brown ones for a given level of volatility? My findings suggest that it is. In figure 4, I show that the S&P Global Clean Energy Select Index has enjoyed slightly higher expected returns over the past five years, with slightly less volatility, than the NYSE ARCA Oil and Gas Index. The envelope of efficient clean energy portfolios (shown in blue) has a lower volatility than the envelope of efficient oil and gas portfolios (in gray).

Of course, this analysis is far from definitive; the differences between the two types of investment are still fractions of a percent, and there are a number of problems with trying to compare these two indices. As noted above, the S&P Clean Energy Select Index is diversified across several industries and contains twelve more firms than ARCA. This may go further to explain the gap in volatility between green and brown portfolios than the macrofinancial factors I have identified in my study. 
